Applications of Minimum Spanning Tree Problem

Difficulty Level : Easy
Last Updated : 28 Jan, 2023
Read
Discuss
Courses
Practice
Video
A Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) is a subset of the edges of a connected, undirected graph that connects all the vertices together, without any cycles and with the minimum possible total edge weight. It is a way to connect all the vertices in a graph in a way that minimizes the total weight of the edges in the tree.

MST is a fundamental problem with diverse applications. 

Network design

telephone, electrical, hydraulic, TV cable, computer, road 
The standard application is to a problem like phone network design. You have a business with several offices; you want to lease phone lines to connect them up with each other, and the phone company charges different amounts of money to connect different pairs of cities. You want a set of lines that connects all your offices with a minimum total cost. It should be a spanning tree, since if a network isn’t a tree you can always remove some edges and save money. 

Approximation algorithms for NP-hard problems

traveling salesperson problem, Steiner tree 
A less obvious application is that the minimum spanning tree can be used to approximately solve the traveling salesman problem. A convenient formal way of defining this problem is to find the shortest path that visits each point at least once. 

Note that if you have a path visiting all points exactly once, it’s a special kind of tree. For instance in the example above, twelve of sixteen spanning trees are actually paths. If you have a path visiting some vertices more than once, you can always drop some edges to get a tree. So in general the MST weight is less than the TSP weight, because it’s a minimization over a strictly larger set. 



On the other hand, if you draw a path tracing around the minimum spanning tree, you trace each edge twice and visit all points, so the TSP weight is less than twice the MST weight. Therefore this tour is within a factor of two of optimal. 

Indirect applications

Max bottleneck paths 
LDPC codes for error correction 
Image registration with Renyi entropy 
Learning salient features for real-time face verification 
Reducing data storage in sequencing amino acids in a protein 
Model locality of particle interactions in turbulent fluid flows 
Autoconfig protocol for Ethernet bridging to avoid cycles in a network 
Cluster analysis 

k clustering problem can be viewed as finding an MST and deleting the k-1 most expensive edges.



Image segmentation: MSTs can be used in image segmentation to segment an image into different regions.

Bioinformatics: MSTs are used to construct phylogenetic trees in bioinformatics which represent the evolutionary relationship between different species.

Facility location: MSTs can be used to determine the optimal location of facilities, such as warehouses or power plants, in a network.

Geographic Information Systems(GIS): MSTs can be used in Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to create a map of a region with the minimum possible total distance between the locations.

Recommended
Solve DSA problems on GfG Practice.

Solve Problems



Like
70
Previous
Prim’s Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) | Greedy Algo-5
Next
Kruskal’s Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm | Greedy Algo-2
Related Articles
1.
Problem Solving for Minimum Spanning Trees (Kruskal’s and Prim’s)
2.
Boruvka's algorithm for Minimum Spanning Tree
3.
Kruskal’s Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm | Greedy Algo-2
4.
Kruskal's Minimum Spanning Tree using STL in C++
5.
Minimum Product Spanning Tree
6.
Reverse Delete Algorithm for Minimum Spanning Tree
7.
Minimum spanning tree cost of given Graphs
8.
Find the weight of the minimum spanning tree
9.
Find the minimum spanning tree with alternating colored edges
10.
Minimum Spanning Tree using Priority Queue and Array List
Article Contributed By :
https://media.geeksforgeeks.org/auth/avatar.png
GeeksforGeeks
Vote for difficulty
Current difficulty : Easy
Easy
Normal
Medium
Hard
Expert
Improved By :
hardikkoriintern
Article Tags :
MST
Graph
Greedy
Tree
Practice Tags :
Graph
Greedy
Tree