Difference between graph and tree

Difficulty Level : Easy
Last Updated : 13 Sep, 2022
Read
Discuss
Courses
Practice
Video
Graph :

A graph is a collection of two sets V and E where V is a finite non-empty set of vertices and E is a finite non-empty set of edges.

Vertices are nothing but the nodes in the graph.
Two adjacent vertices are joined by edges.
Any graph is denoted as G = {V, E}.
For Example:

 

G = {{V1, V2, V3, V4, V5, V6}, {E1, E2, E3, E4, E5, E6, E7}} 

Tree :

A tree is a finite set of one or more nodes such that –

There is a specially designated node called root.
The remaining nodes are partitioned into n>=0 disjoint sets T1, T2, T3, …, Tn 
where T1, T2, T3, …, Tn are called the subtrees of the root.
The concept of a tree is represented by following Fig.



Graph vs Tree
The basis of Comparison	Graph	Tree
Definition	Graph is a non-linear data structure. 	Tree is a non-linear data structure.
Structure	It is a collection of vertices/nodes and edges.	It is a collection of nodes and edges.
Edges	Each node can have any number of edges.	If there is n nodes then there would be n-1 number of edges
Types of Edges	They can be directed or undirected	They are always directed
Root node	There is no unique node called root in graph.	There is a unique node called root(parent) node in trees.
Loop Formation	A cycle can be formed.	There will not be any cycle.
Traversal	For graph traversal, we use Breadth-First Search (BFS), and Depth-First Search (DFS).	We traverse a tree using in-order, pre-order, or post-order traversal methods.
Applications	For finding shortest path in networking graph is used.	For game trees, decision trees, the tree is used.
Recommended
Solve DSA problems on GfG Practice.

Solve Problems

Like
Next
Check if a given graph is tree or not
Related Articles
1.
Difference between Tree edge and Back edge in graph
2.
Connect a graph by M edges such that the graph does not contain any cycle and Bitwise AND of connected vertices is maximum
3.
Difference between General tree and Binary tree
4.
Difference between Binary Tree and Binary Search Tree
5.
Difference between Binary tree and B-tree
6.
Difference between Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) and Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol (RSTP)
7.
Difference between Binary Search Tree and AVL Tree
8.
Difference between B tree and B+ tree
9.
Detect cycle in the graph using degrees of nodes of graph
10.
Convert the undirected graph into directed graph such that there is no path of length greater than 1
Article Contributed By :
https://media.geeksforgeeks.org/auth/avatar.png
romin_vaghani
@romin_vaghani
Vote for difficulty
Current difficulty : Easy
Easy
Normal
Medium
Hard
Expert
Improved By :
guptavivek0503
simmytarika5
mitalibhola94
hardikkoriintern
Article Tags :
Trees
Difference Between
Graph
Tree
Practice Tags :
Graph
Tree
Report Issue