Applications, Advantages and Disadvantages of Heap

Difficulty Level : Basic
Last Updated : 12 Jan, 2023
Read
Discuss
Courses
Practice
Video
Heap is a special tree-based data structure where the tree is always a complete binary tree. Heaps are of two types: Max heap and Min heap. In the case of the max-heap, the root node will have a higher value than its subtree, and for the min-heap, the root node will have a lower value than its subtree.

Operations of Heap:

Heapify: a process of creating a heap from an array.
Insertion: process to insert an element in existing heap time complexity O(log N).
Deletion: deleting the top element of the heap or the highest priority element, and then organizing the heap and returning the element with time complexity O(log N).
Peek: to check or find the most prior element in the heap, (max or min element for max and min heap).
Application of Heap Data Structure:

Heap is used to construct a priority queue.
Heap sort is one of the fastest sorting algorithms with time complexity of O(N* log(N), and it’s easy to implement.
Best First Search (BFS) is an informed search, where unlike the queue in Breadth-First Search, this technique is implemented using a priority queue.
Heaps can be used to efficiently maintain the median element in a constantly updating data set.
Heaps can be used in the construction of Huffman coding trees.
Heap data structures are used in memory management to efficiently allocate and deallocate memory blocks.
Real-Time Application of Heap:

Patient treatment: In a hospital, an emergency patient, or the patient with more injury is treated first. Here the priority is the degree of injury.
Systems concerned with security use heap sort, like the Linux kernel.
Advantages of Heap Data Structure:

Less time complexity, for inserting or deleting an element in the heap the time complexity is just O(log N).
It helps to find the minimum number and greatest number.
To just peek at the most prior element the time complexity is constant O(1).
Can be implemented using an array, it doesn’t need any extra space for pointer.
A binary heap is a balanced binary tree, and easy to implement.
Heap can be created with O(N) time.
 Heaps can be used to implement a priority queue.
 Heaps are efficient for large data sets.
The memory is dynamically allocated.
Ability to efficiently find the minimum and the maximum element.
Used in graph algorithms such as Dijkstra and A* search algorithms.
Disadvantages of Heap Data Structure:

The time complexity for searching an element in Heap is O(N).
To find a successor or predecessor of an element, the heap takes O(N) time, whereas BST takes only O(log N) time.
To print all elements of the heap in sorted order time complexity is O(N*log N), whereas, for BST, it takes only O(N) time.
Memory management is more complex in heap memory because it is used globally. Heap memory is divided into two parts-old generations and the young generation etc. at java garbage collection.
Not suitable for small datasets.
Complex implementation.
Traversing is not easy as we need to remove the top element in order to access the rest of the elements.
Recommended
Solve DSA problems on GfG Practice.

Solve Problems



Like
17
Previous
Benefits of Heap over Sorted Arrays
Next
Top Data Structures That Every Programmer Must Know
Related Articles
1.
Difference between Binary Heap, Binomial Heap and Fibonacci Heap
2.
Difference between Min Heap and Max Heap
3.
Heap Sort for decreasing order using min heap
4.
When building a Heap, is the structure of Heap unique?
5.
Convert Min Heap to Max Heap
6.
Applications of Heap Data Structure
7.
Tournament Tree (Winner Tree) and Binary Heap
8.
Fibonacci Heap - Insertion and Union
9.
Fibonacci Heap - Deletion, Extract min and Decrease key
10.
Find min and max values among all maximum leaf nodes from all possible Binary Max Heap
Article Contributed By :
https://media.geeksforgeeks.org/auth/avatar.png
maityashis766
@maityashis766
Vote for difficulty
Current difficulty : Basic
Easy
Normal
Medium
Hard
Expert
Improved By :
bhaskarkurukuri1
shreyasnaphad
Article Tags :
Picked
Heap
Practice Tags :
Heap