
Applications of Heap Data Structure

Difficulty Level : Easy
Last Updated : 13 Jan, 2023
Read
Discuss
Courses
Practice
Video
Heap Data Structure is generally taught with Heapsort. Heapsort algorithm has limited uses because Quicksort is better in practice. Nevertheless, the Heap data structure itself is enormously used. Following are some uses other than Heapsort. Priority Queues: Priority queues can be efficiently implemented using Binary Heap because it supports insert(), delete() and extractmax(), decreaseKey() operations in O(logn) time. Binomial Heap and Fibonacci Heap are variations of Binary Heap. These variations perform union also in O(logn) time which is a O(n) operation in Binary Heap. Heap Implemented priority queues are used in Graph algorithms like Prim’s Algorithm and Dijkstra’s algorithm. Order statistics: The Heap data structure can be used to efficiently find the kth smallest (or largest) element in an array. See method 4 and 6 of this post for details. References: http://net.pku.edu.cn/~course/cs101/2007/resource/Intro2Algorithm/book6/chap07.htm http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heap_%28data_structure%29 Please write comments if you find anything incorrect, or you want to share more information about the topic discussed above.

Heap data structures have a number of applications due to their ability to provide fast access to the smallest or largest element in a collection. Some common applications of heap data structures include:

Priority queues: Heaps can be used to implement priority queues, where each element has a priority associated with it and elements with higher priorities are given priority over elements with lower priorities.

Sorting: Heapsort is a comparison-based sorting algorithm that uses a heap data structure to sort a list of elements. It has a time complexity of O(n*log(n)).


Graph algorithms: Heaps are often used in graph algorithms, such as Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm and the A* search algorithm, to efficiently determine the next element to be processed.

Median maintenance: Heaps can be used to maintain the median of a stream of numbers by using a max-heap to store the smaller half of the numbers and a min-heap to store the larger half.

Resource allocation: Heaps can be used to efficiently allocate resources in a system, such as memory blocks or CPU time, by assigning a priority to each resource and processing requests in order of priority.

Selection algorithms: Heaps can be used in selection algorithms, such as the quickselect algorithm, to efficiently find the kth smallest element in a list.

Recommended
Solve DSA problems on GfG Practice.

Solve Problems

Like
Next
Time Complexity of building a heap
Related Articles
1.
Difference between Binary Heap, Binomial Heap and Fibonacci Heap
2.
When building a Heap, is the structure of Heap unique?
3.
Heap Sort for decreasing order using min heap
4.
Difference between Min Heap and Max Heap
5.
Convert Min Heap to Max Heap
6.
Leaf starting point in a Binary Heap data structure
7.
Introduction to Heap - Data Structure and Algorithm Tutorials
8.
Applications, Advantages and Disadvantages of Heap
9.
Tournament Tree (Winner Tree) and Binary Heap
10.
Time Complexity of building a heap
Article Contributed By :
https://media.geeksforgeeks.org/auth/avatar.png
GeeksforGeeks
Vote for difficulty
Current difficulty : Easy
Easy
Normal
Medium
Hard
Expert
Improved By :
vinayedula
avinashrat55252
Article Tags :
Heap